Hello, my name is Elena Nikolaevna Stanislavchik.
I teach business economics, financial management, investment design at the Academy of Business Administration,
as well as in the system of training of professional accountants, anti-crisis managers, within the framework of the MBA program.
I am actively engaged in consulting as an expert in investment projects.
I work in the project financing department of Intrast Bank.
Today we will discuss the basics of financial planning.
The importance and relevance of this topic today, in the wake of financial scandals, in my opinion, does not raise any doubts.
Do you want to know how the actions of financial managers can lead to zero achievements of a company in production,
in the markets of surplus, in insurance, or vice versa, how to create money from scratch,
skillfully managing the turnover of assets, profitability, optimizing the cost of capital,
using the effects of leverage and other professional secrets.
Your business is short of money, there is profit in the account, and the account is empty.
These problems are intended to be solved by financial planning.
Financial planning is interesting, useful and necessary.
Our video course is intended for managers and managers,
designed to instill the sustainable skills of planning,
including forecasting of the components of the money flows and assessing the expected financial results.
The course is aimed at solving the emerging problems in business.
The training method assumes that the listeners are already familiar with the basic terms of financial management
or can refer to the glossary and the recommended literature.
During the lecture, I often use the term enterprise,
considering it the most general and, thereby, emphasize the entrepreneurial component of any company,
company, corporation, organization or financial institution.
Our lecture consists of 10 sections.
I hope that by formulating the target parameters, strategic and tactical tasks,
we will be able to emphasize and highlight the red thread of planning processes.
During the presentation of theoretical foundations of financial planning,
examples from practice, logical schemes and graphs will be given.
The approximate ratio of theory to practice will be 10.5 minutes, 15 minutes per one section.
For independent work, you can use an e-book,
which contains text and lectures, and a workbook with tasks.
Please complete the tasks after listening to each section of the video course.
Friends, first of all, I would like to introduce your enterprise as an open system
connected with other enterprises in the markets of purchases and sales by the movement of goods,
by the goods flows.
The goods flows define the main functions of the enterprise,
providing, manufacturing goods or providing services and sales.
For the movement of goods, the opposite flows of money are necessary,
cash flow, cash flows.
Cash flows also connect enterprises with the state and the capital market.
Thus, enterprises in financial management are a subject of financial relations,
surrounded, immersed in the financial sphere.
Input and output cash flows,
we will call cash inflows or incomes and outflows or payments.
I ask you, looking at this scheme of financial flows,
to try to formulate a financial goal, a financial result,
a financial condition for the prosperity of the company,
a condition for enrichment or a condition for the growth of the value of the business.
The answer to the income is not quite correct.
Let me explain by example.
Let's say that the revenue of the enterprise for some period was 1000 RUB,
the current expenses are 800 RUB,
including the amortization figure of 100 RUB.
Then the balance profit of the enterprise is 200 RUB,
the tax on the profit at the rate of 24% is 48 RUB,
and the account of the enterprise will have 162 RUB of net profit
and 100 RUB of amortization figures.
These figures appeared in the accounting in one version of the accounting policy.
But if we use another accounting policy
and apply, for example, accelerated amortization,
increasing the amortization figure by 2 times,
then we see that despite the fact that the profit in the accounting is decreasing,
the tax on the profit is decreasing,
therefore, the enterprise's account, as a financial result,
results in a larger amount.
The financial goal of the business and the task of financial planning
is to coordinate the inflows of financial resources and outflows
or to provide liquidity in the broad sense.
Accordingly, the financial result, net cash flow,
or net cash flow, is a net cash flow.
The difference between these indicators, profit and net cash flow,
is based on the division of the concept of results,
income, and expenses, expenses, and payments.
Income and expenses, inflows and outflows,
are the main objects of financial planning.
Profit and cash flow are different sections of the analysis,
interconnected but not duplicating parameters.
Thus, profit in accounting does not always mean
the presence of money in the account of the entrepreneur.
For example, the Wallmart network,
before its maximum growth in the 70s and 80s,
had a constant negative free cash flow.
Sam Walton opened a new branch at such a pace
that there was not enough current turnover for financing,
but the profitability of new trading houses was on average 25%,
which was much higher than the average capital price of the company.
Thus, behind the negative net cash flow,
success was actually hidden,
and the company's share price was the highest in the world at the time,
and Sam Walton became the richest person in America.
The indicator of the added economic value of the Wallmart network
increased from $30 million in the 80s
to $528 million in the 1990s.
So, we have clarified the goals of the activity
in the light of the concept of cash flows,
and now we need to know exactly
when and how much money is needed
to fulfill the tasks set,
when and how much will be received.
Financial planning
This is what financial planning is all about.
Planning is a component of the company's management process.
It is a conscious prediction of actions,
a comparison of various development options,
a definition of goals, paths and conditions for achieving goals,
modeling the results of the activity,
the search for favorable opportunities,
and the creation of conditions for tomorrow.
Strategic planning begins with the question
of what we want to achieve and where we are.
This catalog of requirements gives an answer to the question
of what we want to achieve
with the key parameters for developing a strategy.
Financial planning can be considered
as a process of setting strategic parameters of activity
and standards for controlling their implementation.
Today, in the conditions of uncertainty, instability of the situation,
it is necessary to review the planned tasks,
the set of indicators and standards,
which is the essence of monitoring.
The first place today is given by two blocks of management
– planning and monitoring.
Financial planning is a component
of the general planning process at the enterprise.
Financial planning uses information
from the marketing plan,
production plan,
subordinates of the mission and general strategy.
The main tool of planning is analysis.
Financial planning uses the results
of financial analysis,
the analysis of accounting data.
The scheme of planning of money flows
we have considered in the previous block
allows us to look at the place of the block of finances
in the system of balanced indicators.
This is not some isolated area.
Finances are invested in all operational processes.
Financial planning connects marketing,
personnel and production planning
in a single link.
The essence of financial planning
is that we need to calculate
all the components of the inflows and outflows
of the financial funds,
assess the cash flow.
Financial planning takes into account
external and internal parameters.
External parameters include
the amount of money,
the volume of demand
and supply of goods,
the prices for products and resources,
the system of calculations
between suppliers and consumers,
the conditions of lending,
the order of taxation
and other factors.
Internal planning parameters,
such as the scale of the business,
determine the production capacity
and, accordingly,
the number of products
that are issued.
The level of technology of the organization
of operational processes determines
the cost and prices of the products.
The level of management
is expressed
in the effectiveness
of business activity.
Types of planning
can be divided
according to various signs
of classification
into operational, current
and forecasting.
According to the time,
the planning horizon
is short-term
and short-term.
Types of planning can be divided
according to various signs
of classification
into operational, current
and forecasting.
These types of planning
differ in different degrees of flexibility.
Operational planning is
the lower management link,
the current middle management link
and strategic planning
is the higher management link.
As we have already said,
planning is inseparable
from controlling.
Therefore,
each type of planning
involves setting
certain indicators.
Forecasting sets
general strategic parameters,
such as the market value
of the enterprise,
the structure of capital,
the average value of capital,
the economic added value.
Current planning
based on these strategic indicators
calculates financial
coefficients
and, finally,
the maximum detail
occurs
in operational planning,
when private
individual indicators
are set,
which are understandable
at any lower management link.
The content of planning
is different,
for example,
in the planning of the creation of a new enterprise
or in the planning of the development
and expansion of the business
of the current enterprise.
In the direction of planning,
in the planning technique,
there are forms of planning
from top to bottom,
from bottom to top
or counter-planning.
Thus,
Valya and I
tried to connect
the task of increasing
the value of the business
and such control parameters
as the price of capital,
the target structure of capital
and the rules of financing.
The essence of financial planning
is to calculate
all the components of the inflows
and outflows of financial funds.
At the same time,
we also need to calculate
the external and internal conditions.
The external parameters of planning
include the volume of demand
and supply of goods,
the prices for products and services,
the system of calculations between enterprises,
the conditions of lending,
the order of taxation.
The internal parameters of planning
are, first of all,
the scale of the business,
determining the production capacity
and the number of products
or services.
The level of technology
and the organization of production processes
determine the cost
and prices for goods.
The level of management
determines the effectiveness
of the indicators of activity.
These external and internal parameters
affect the income and expenses
of the enterprise
on the inflows and outflows of money.
Planning is based
on a certain set
of systematic key parameters
of activity
and planned indicators.
In general, we can say
that financial planning
is a process,
and a financial plan is a set of documents
based on which planned financial indicators
of activity are calculated.
The types of financial planning
are divided
according to various features
into the main three groups
of forecasting,
current planning
and operational planning,
respectively, which are distinguished
by the horizon of planning.
The long-term perspective
is forecasting,
the medium-term is current planning
and the operational is limited
to the short-term period.
The degree of detail
for each type of planning
is its own,
the most enlarged indicators
inherent in the strategic planning
are the most detailed indicators
of activity,
the most detailed indicators
are those inherent
in the operational planning.
In addition to these features,
the current,
operational
and long-term planning
are distinguished
by the volume
and completeness of information,
flexibility,
various levels of management
are engaged in different types of planning.
Operational planning
is the lower management level,
the current planning
is the middle management level
and the strategic parameters
are determined by the higher management.
The indicators that are established
during planning
as a result of planning
are the following.
Strategic parameters
as a result of forecasting
include market value
of the enterprise,
capital structure,
additional value.
Current financial planning
leads to a certain set
of financial coefficients.
Operational planning
clarifies
and highlights
private, separate indicators of activity,
for example, the financial cycle,
which we will consider
in the next sections.
The content of planning
includes planning
of the current enterprise,
planning of its development
or we create a new enterprise,
develop
investment projects.
Planning technique
can be from top to bottom,
from bottom to top
or more often mixed,
counter-planning.
How does strategic planning work?
The limitation of the spheres
of long-term and short-term planning
implies not only
different horizons of planning
but also different set of target parameters.
Strategic financial decisions
on investments, financing,
mergers and absorption
of the enterprise,
the economic value,
the target capital structure,
the average value of capital.
The strategy is to ensure
financial balance.
Special attention
should be paid
to the financial and management
parameters of the enterprise,
since the financial sphere
is inseparably connected
with the production sphere,
with the operational processes,
and the management decisions
in the field of purchases,
production and sales.
Let's look at the strategic parameters
of financial planning.
We are talking about the long-term
financial plan, which implements
the decisions of managers
on the investments needed
to implement the accepted strategy
of increasing the value of the business
and on the financing methods.
In these decisions
on investments and financing,
the target capital structure
is used as a reference
for the comparison of alternatives.
The target capital structure
is the parameter.
In these decisions
the target capital structure
is used as a reference
for the comparison of alternatives.
Since the price of capital
increases with the increase
of the share of borrowed funds,
the management task is to choose
the target capital structure.
For example, the asset structure
is more intensively used
by those enterprises
that have property suitable
for the deposit.
The growth rate of fast-growing enterprises
is more intensively used
by external financing,
while the costs of placing shares
are usually higher than the costs of loans.
Profitability.
The next factor.
Enterprises with high returns
on invested capital prefer
to invest their own funds.
They have enough accumulated profits.
The planning of the capital structure
refers to the area of financial leverage,
which is used in decisions
about whether to take or not to take loans,
that is,
about the structure of financing sources.
Leverage refers
to the highest skill
of financial management.
It is with the help of the leverage
that financial managers
decide
the fate of the company,
how it will develop
in terms of profitability
and risk.
Profitability and risk
are the polar motives
for making decisions.
High profitability
is usually achieved
by the price of risky actions.
Therefore,
in order to minimize the risk,
as usually managers tend to risk,
shareholders require
a certain return on their invested capital.
Therefore,
certain rules of financing
have been developed.
These rules can be easily controlled
by the balance of any enterprise
by comparing
the positions of assets
and passives of the enterprise.
Here you can see
the main components
that we need now,
what to pay attention to
in assets and passives of the enterprise.
The so-called
golden rule of financing
describes the requirements
of the horizontal structure of the balance.
That is,
the positions of assets
and passives are compared.
According to this rule,
it is necessary
that the long-term positions
of assets,
which the enterprise will use
over long periods,
be covered by the long-term
rules of financing.
In short,
the capital itself should be covered
by non-returnable assets.
This is a narrow and strict rule of financing.
The extended rule of financing
allows you to compare
all long-term sources of financing,
that is, your own capital
and borrowed capital
with non-returnable assets.
The golden rule of financing
is called
the golden rule
of capital management in Germany.
The requirement of the vertical structure
of capital is
that your own capital
and your own sources of financing
should exceed the borrowed capital.
This is the so-called
50-50 rule,
the favorite American
rule of financing.
As the Americans say,
the essence of this rule
is to limit the size of your business
and the size of your wallet.
The rule of financing is aimed at
dividing the risk between the investor
and the creditor.
The owner
has no right to count on
the fact that
by taking some insignificant
capital,
he can get a significant loan.
The rule says
that
the condition of 50-50 is necessary.
This is in theory.
In fact,
the deviation of the share
of your own capital
in the balance
from the critical level
of your own capital
may be less than 50%
due to the mismatch
of the market and balance value of the business.
In addition,
a low share of your own capital
can be afforded by companies
that have a stable and predictable
income of money,
for example, retail trading,
and other business activities.
If we take the statistics of the companies,
we will see
what is going on,
how the companies have solved
their problems of investment and financing.
We will see that
in the vast majority of companies,
for example,
the accounting in Germany
does not exceed 25%.
We see
that the share of your own capital
also depends on the scale of the business.
The higher the turnover,
the greater the share
of your own capital.
These rules
can be controlled
in addition to the balance
positions,
by calculating
special analytical coefficients.
Please see
the main coefficients
corresponding to the rules of financing.
The golden rule of financing
is the coefficient of the coverage
of your own capital,
the coefficient of the coverage
the coefficient of the maneuverability
of your own capital,
and the coefficient of financial stability.
These coefficients
are calculated
according to the reporting data
and are the main conditions
for obtaining
new loans.
Their normative value
is usually recalibrated.
The company chooses
its favorite coefficient
and focuses on this one.
We see that these coefficients
are duplicating each other,
they are interconnected.
It is enough to choose
one coefficient
and control
its normative value.
Thus,
the weekend parameters
of financial forecasting,
strategic financial planning
and the next stage
of current planning
are the amount
of investments,
which determines the structure
of assets,
sources of financing,
and, accordingly, the structure
of passive capital,
the accumulation of profits
and the pure money flow.
We will now consider
the tactic of financial planning.
The tactic is developed
as an answer to the question
what we need to do
at our enterprise
to implement the strategy.
And as an answer
we set the task of current financial planning
to ensure financial balance.
Please look
at the next slide.
The image in the form of scales
shows financial balance.
It is a state
that allows
the enterprise to achieve
the goals set
and to balance
between two components
of the enterprise.
It is the balance between
the pursuit of profitability
and the avoidance of risk,
between profitability and liquidity.
We see a cornerstone
in the center of the slide
that is the condition
of financial balance.
This condition forms strategic solutions
in the process of
future planning
that are decided
on investments and financing.
That is,
financial balance is based
on a balanced structure of capital,
on financial stability.
We recall the rules of financing
and it is the compliance
of these rules
that determines
our financial stability
and creates conditions
for the balance
between liquidity and profitability.
Financial stability
is the ability
of the enterprise
to maintain independence
when changes occur in the financial markets,
from creditors,
to maintain independence.
Financial stability
is our rule
50-50
and the corresponding coefficients
that can be calculated
on the predicted balance of the enterprise
based on the results
of strategic planning.
This is the coefficient of financial activity
or sometimes called
the financial shoulder,
the coefficient of financial dependence,
the level of one's own capital.
You see
in the calculation scheme
the coefficients are interconnected
and all of them
are based on the rule
that one's own capital
must exceed the borrowed capital.
For example,
we can consider an enterprise
to be absolutely stable
but it is rare
to find such an enterprise
that uses only its own funds
and has no borrowed funds
at all.
Normal financial stability
is the compliance
of the financing rules.
One-to-one, one's own
and borrowed funds are used equally.
And the unstable financial situation
is when an enterprise
uses additional
unreasonable sources
to cover some of the reserves
and the financial situation
is critical
when the enterprise
has unpaid loans
and overdue debts.
An enterprise is not
payable.
Our financial scales
are shifting.
Liquidity
is falling
in this picture.
In general,
liquidity is a rather problematic
category both in theory and in practice.
Theoretically,
this concept is considered
in the broad and narrow sense.
In the broad sense
liquidity is a compliance
of the money flows.
We talked about it at the beginning
of the presentation of the financial enterprise
from the point of view of the movement
of the money flows.
From this point of view,
liquidity can be identified
as financial stability.
Long-term liquidity
is a structural liquidity
that is obtained
as a result of
making decisions
and financing.
On the other hand,
liquidity is often understood
as something close to payability.
Liquidity is a current
condition of payment
affordability.
Another concept
of liquidity
is the turnover
of current assets.
This is the ability of assets
to transform
into liquid assets
and money.
The problem
of liquidity indicators
is that
in practice
there is always a question
about their normative level.
What enterprise
can be considered
good from the point of view
of liquidity?
Attempts to introduce
some general concepts,
rules, and coefficients
are not sustainable.
Liquidity is a characteristic
that largely depends
on the business
property of the enterprise.
The requirement
of the current liquidity
coefficient,
which should be
greater than 2,
is not to be
criticized.
We have talked a lot about this,
but liquidity is the only
official financial normative
that exists.
Of course,
violation of financial balance
and distortions
in one or the other direction
can lead
to risky and critical situations,
to unpayment,
to bankruptcy.
I would like to draw your attention
to the fact that
we have already discussed
these courses in other topics
of financial management.
It is important for us to understand
that the concepts of financial stability
and liquidity are,
in economic terms,
interconnected and
derive from the compliance
of financing rules.
They connect the structure
of assets and the structure
of passives.
The degree of unprofitability
of the enterprise
can be controlled
by the absence of money
on the enterprise's account
and by overdue debts.
In our realities,
the critical term of payment
is 3 months.
According to the law of bankruptcy,
in this sad case,
the enterprise can be
responsible
for its costs,
including financial planning
costs.
The case of bankruptcy
can be brought against it.
These indicators
of financial stability, liquidity,
profitability
for financial planning
are needed as limiters
of the risk level.
On the opposite side of the scales
we have indicators of efficiency,
profitability, profitability
and turnover.
Or,
for example,
if the enterprise
takes an aggressive policy
to increase the share of the market.
This is a real goal,
an interesting task,
a necessary one.
It plans
to increase the production volumes
according to this strategy.
It plans additional
investments in production capacity.
In the case of changes
in the market,
for example,
some shocks,
we are familiar with this,
the reduction of the payable demand
and the inability to produce
in the planned volumes,
there are losses
due to the operation lever.
Another risky
situation is
when the enterprise uses additional loans
in order to ensure
the planned
volumes.
The increase in the volumes of sales
of additional loans can lead
to financial stability losses
due to the operation of the financial lever.
High profitability
of assets is another
goal,
a goal of profitability,
a goal of ensuring
the effectiveness of the enterprise.
It can be achieved
by minimizing the reserves.
Minimal reserves
are vulnerable to breakdowns.
At some point
we may not have enough money
to buy a new batch of goods,
we may not have
the components
for production launches.
Or even
if we have
a new client,
we must somehow satisfy
his demand
and provide
his products,
but we do not have such products.
We lose the products.
Thus, we can
schematically imagine
that the current financial planning
should ensure
in total
both the parameters of efficiency
of the enterprise, profitability,
and financial stability,
liquidity,
and paymentability.
All this, of course,
is aimed at
increasing the market value
of the enterprise.
Now,
after we have discussed
the basics of the current planning,
I would like to ask you
to look at the accountability of your enterprise,
the available forms of accountability,
the 1 and 2 forms of public accountability,
when you always have them
at hand,
you can get them.
What is striking
in terms of financial stability
and liquidity?
Do you have,
when you know the parameters,
do you have a threat of paymentability?
A more complete analysis
will allow you to identify
the problem areas
and set the task of changing the tactics,
outline the normative level of tasks
for planning for the future.
So, friends,
we have discussed the strategic parameters
of planning,
the planning tactics,
and now we move on to the operational planning
and consider
the parameters of operational management.
I define
the financial cycle
with such parameters.
The financial cycle is the period
of money transfer,
the time during which the money
is withdrawn from the turnover.
This is the period
between the withdrawal of funds
and the inflow of funds.
On the slide,
you can see the component
of the financial cycle
and you can see
that the financial cycle
is superimposed
on the operational cycle
due to the fact that we can
receive a repayment
for the supply of resources.
The component
of the financial cycle
requires optimization.
The maximum reduction
of the financial cycle
is the main increase
in the cost of the business
for the lower level of management.
But, of course,
there are some limits.
We cannot reduce it
to infinity.
Therefore, we need
to combine
the parameters
of the financial activity
with the parameters
of the operational cycle.
For example,
we consider
the following parameters
in terms of the main components
of the activity
– procurement, production,
operational sphere and sales.
In the case of repurchase,
the norm of the reserve
is the following.
The day
is the indicator
of the periodicity
of the supply.
The norm of the reserve
is the days
for which we create a reserve
in order to ensure
the minimum, but sufficient level
for the interval of time
between one and the other supply.
This is the management norm
that is clear
in the sphere of material and technical
provision.
In the financial sphere,
it is represented
in the form of the cost of the reserves
and is added up
as a result of a certain
payment period
that we receive
for the supply of resources.
The next sphere of activity
is the operational sphere
of the production cycle.
The most important norm
of operational management
is the duration of the production cycle,
the interval of time
between the launch
and the moment
of the ready-made product
being received.
The financial indicator
of the corresponding duration
of the production cycle
is the cost of the unfinished production.
The shorter the cycle,
the more organized
the production activity of the enterprise is.
In the sphere of sales,
the important operative norm
of management
is the norm of the ready-made product reserve.
The ready-made product
is stored in the warehouse
for a certain time
inevitably.
For each enterprise,
there is a certain
average period
specific to this industry.
On the other hand,
in the financial sphere,
we have
a debitor's debt,
which is formed
due to the delay of payments.
The financial indicator
of the ready-made product reserve
is the cost of the ready-made
product reserve.
These norms
form
the duration
of the financial cycle.
For example,
how do these indicators
work within the framework
of planning?
If we planned
according to the parameters of the annual plan,
the current plan,
the duration of the financial cycle is 30 days
for all components.
In reality,
in six months,
the condition of sales has worsened
and payments for our product
will be made for several days,
for example, for 10 days later.
From a financial point of view,
this means a risk
of liquidity disruption.
That is,
we have a lag of time
that needs to be closed
by something
or by capital,
but this is an extreme measure,
undesirable,
or it is necessary to put tasks
before production units
and to tighten some norms
in certain stages.
For example,
to put tasks
before technologists
and before the production organizers
and to tighten the production process
and production processes
for these days.
If this does not work,
then we will have to take additional loans
and, of course,
to bear additional costs.
The big problem of managing
cash funds
is related to the instability
of the calculations,
especially if the enterprise
has some seasonality,
instability of production,
companies that work by contracts.
For example,
for construction companies
that are active
in the summer,
and money is received
from August to December
for new projects
the following autumn,
as a result, cash breaks are formed
and it is necessary to plan
the coverage of cash breaks
and to receive additional loans.
I hope you have already calculated
in your mind
the duration of the financial cycle
of your company.
An interesting situation
is when the financial cycle
is negative.
What does this mean?
This is the dream
of any financial management.
This is how large supermarkets work.
The condition is a half-year
repayment of payments
for the supply of products.
This is a common condition
for the largest supermarkets.
As a result,
from the financial cycle,
they have only one problem
– managing reserves.
And this is a problem
that is not solved
by the government.
To solve this problem,
the reserves are kept at a normal level
and the excess reserves
are sold at low,
so to say,
discount prices.
Therefore, this expression
and the stereotype
that you can buy good,
cheap, high-quality things
is related to the era of the deficit.
Today we already know
what is possible,
but we do not know
how to solve this problem.
I would like to ask you
to make a long-term plan
for your company
and calculate the operational
and financial cycle.
Maybe something can be changed.
I hope that the delay
when buying goods
that your suppliers
provide to you
and the delay
when supplying resources
exceeds the delay
that you provide
to your customers
for your products and services.
If not,
we can say right away
that the success of the planning
will most likely be unsuccessful.
I have also selected
for you examples
of managing the financial cycle
in the companies
of Metra Cash & Carry, IBM,
Ford, General Motors and others.
Stay curious!